Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Harry Harrison has made a name for himself in science fiction in many areas.
He's noted for his novels, short stories, and the anthologies he's edited.
One of Harrison's notable contributions is the popularization of so-called adventure
science fiction.
It's typified by the trilogy whose volumes are aptly named Death World One, Death World
Two, and Death World Three.
Harrison told us how this particular brand of science fiction originated with the writing
of Death World One.
You mentioned the fact that there's adventure science fiction.
Well, don't laugh, but at that time in science fiction, which was Campbell, which was analog.
If you were a true blue reader, you read Starling's stories in Sling Wonder, because you'd
had to wait another three weeks for the next issue of astounding.
That's where the action was.
And he had been very cerebral.
He had a whole novel of people talking to each other.
Nothing moving at all, no action.
And I want to do a book that had action part of the plot.
I mean, that's sort of stupid to say now with all the guns blowing heads away.
I mean, that whole gore school and the whole sword and sorcery, sword and butchery.
I mean, action galore for no reason at all.
But in those days, it was getting dim, I thought.
So I worked out, but I didn't want to do an action plot for action, say.
So I'm a great back plotter, and I find a reason to do a book, and then I put a book
to the reason.
And the reason I wanted to have the action, I wanted to have a realistic.
So I thought it was Superman.
And in this book, you find, if you look at it closely, it's done two or three levels.
The action plots a service.
But there below that is the idea of Superman, the Nietzsche talked about.
And that Superman magazine talks about.
And I'm very much against Superman, physical Superman.
And if you look in the book, you'll see that if you are so brutalized to be
physically a Superman, your intellectual content is zero.
And I said it in a number of different ways.
And I'm very much against militarism, and that's been there in a number of different ways.
All of it couched in his venture plot.
And it's up to the reader to read it whichever way he wants.
And he'll find a good adventure plot if he wants to find even more about it.
Remember when I first published it, a reader in England came up to me, and
I was looking forward to great return from literate Englishmen about
heavily intellectual content.
And he said, all areas that I read that book, I sold my friends to read,
all I like it, you did, but you tell me, all read, I said, it's all about guns.
The protagonist of Death World One is Jason DenAlt.
Harrison liked him so much that he had to write two more installments.
The Death World two and three came out by happenstance.
It's just that the character was successful.
I want to write another adventure style book.
And I realized after I wrote it, I left the ending open.
You had to get these people off that planet, the certain part of them had to leave.
They just go for killing things.
He starts thinking about it and their friends with his.
And he's a weak man personally.
And he has, like I say, he supplies a part.
So they don't supply, they have the big bodies and the tiny point heads.
He's a weakling in their terms, but he's a man of intelligence.
So therefore, I said, gee, what if there was another planet?
He had a problem.
He'd have to go along and organize it.
And then the plot developed.
I did that once more, and that was the end of it, as far as I was concerned.
People asked for another Death World.
And no, I run that particular plot device while I was pinned into it.
It worked three times.
It worked pretty well.
Harrison told us his books usually have philosophical content.
Death World Two, for instance.
OK, Death World Two, you may think it's about going off and blowing things up
and killing things and rushing around.
It really is.
The entire book is about the difference in meaning between ethics and ethos.
And that's what it's about.
I keep repeating over and over through that thing.
And a lot of guns go off.
A lot of good things happen.
You learn a bit of Esperanto.
But also, what science fiction can do, it's a book that takes the study
of a philosophical question or a problem of meaning.
We'll have more with Harry Harrison on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
One of Science Fiction writer Harry Harrison's most unforgettable character is the slippery
Jim DeGrees, the stainless steel rat.
The Stainless Steel Rats adventure spin five novels so far.
We asked Harrison where he got the concept of a stainless steel rat.
I remember the basic idea.
It was just that, as the old rat says, we have flesh and blood rats and wooden buildings.
We'll have stainless steel rats and concrete ones.
Then Harrison went on to tell us a bit about the first novel in the series, the Stainless
Steel Rat, and how the idea then grew.
It's basically a very old idea of the villain as hero.
Turn the world on his head.
This is what we have in the saint.
Who tended to pontificate a little bit too much.
It's Rupert of Hentzau and that prisoner of Zenda.
We all love him better than we do the goodie goodies with his job.
It is, if you pardon the expression, my dear friend Kingsley Amis had a pick-a-rest novel.
Don't be ashamed if you don't understand what that means.
I said, thanks Kingsley.
I ran off to a dictionary.
The pick-a-rest novel is just that.
The villain as the hero as villain and villain as hero.
And when I realized what I was doing, I had come onto a formula and I was trying to get
humor into it as well.
There was no humor in Science Fiction.
There was nothing that I was doing.
Anyone else alive, the character developed as he went along.
And I get clues back from readers about it.
And an English reader told me he likes to read this thing because the hero does all the
thing he wish he could do against society and gets away with it.
Everyone hates bureaucracy.
And I said, my God, you're right.
I thought about it in the very next rat book.
The first chapter, nothing to do with the rest of the book.
The first chapter we look at, just something happens to his dear wife, Angelina, and the
enemy has her.
And he goes off.
The enemy is the internal review service, the old IRS man.
He goes and burns on all income tax records for the whole planet, cheering everybody up.
And the story begins.
But that's something we all wish could happen tomorrow except that people work for the IRS.
The Stainless Steel Rat novels form a humorous adventure series.
We ask Harris in what place humor has in Science Fiction.
Very little.
It could have a bigger one.
And the answer is a very mechanical one.
Editors, for the most part, are dummies.
And even the few bright ones have their own particular taste in humor.
That is a matter of taste.
You bring an adventure novel in, and it will say, yeah, well, Harry's unbetter, but it
moves along, people are killed, I'll buy it.
Bring a love story in, oh, well, girl gets kissed, you know, it's a little boring, but I'll buy it.
You bring in a humor novel, he doesn't laugh.
He does not buy it.
And if they laugh, I've heard them say, one of them is a rejecter, it was too funny.
They're afraid the readers won't laugh.
So the only way you can have a reputation is a humor writer.
And how do you get a humor writer?
You've got to sell a book, but you can't sell it.
It's a catch-22 thing.
And I snuck it in the Stainless Steel Rat.
I would make each one a little bit funny than the one before, and eventually, the editor was laughing, readers were laughing,
hurrah, I'm a humor writer.
Harrison's early characters, Jason DenAult and Slippery Jim DeGrees, are strong characters.
But Harrison told us science fiction is really based on ideas, not characters.
Science fiction is not a character-based form of fiction.
You can have three-dimensional characters in science fiction, but the idea comes first.
It's not an idea fiction.
The form of fiction, we can have an idea as a hero.
The main thing that has that is what you call three-dimensional.
Have the idea for a character who would do these things.
Which means far too often in science fiction, you'll get two-dimensional characters who just act the assigned role of the plot, given to by the author.
And we don't mind reading that.
We really want to read about the action to make good science fiction, viable, interesting, fun science fiction,
when you have to assign the character to the role, you must build his character as a character.
That's where the art comes in.
There are two things in all kinds of fiction.
The craft of science fiction, constructing your plot.
The art of science fiction is making your characters three-dimensional.
Which is true for any character I write.
Very rarely in science fiction do you have character-based fiction.
If you have, it's usually not science fiction.
More with Harry Harrison on our next show.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Perhaps science fiction author Harry Harrison's single most famous novel is Bill, The Galactic Hero.
The protagonist is Bill, a hayseed from the farm who gets Shanghai into the Empire Space Corps to fight the evil Chingers.
Bill, the Galactic Hero, is a spoof of war, bureaucracy, and the pulps, among other things.
Here, here is some comments and some of the influences which helped inspire the novel.
Bill, the Galactic Hero, there again, he was assigned the role.
He was a good soldier, Shfaq.
He's the guy who gets it in the neck all the time and had to be a science fiction army.
And I think he just made it explode in me.
Having been in the army and seated here in the heart of the military, I'm an enlisted man.
I have the highest rank in the army, that of a sergeant.
You have to get to general before you get anything higher than that.
Second lieutenant, you know, grubs to be walked on.
And the whole different attitude.
And the officers like the military.
They like to tell people what to do.
And usually what they tell them to do is not for the good of the people they're talking to, they should get killed for it.
But the enlisted men want to stay alive.
As the Osirians said in Catch-22, they're trying to kill me.
He didn't mean the enemy, he meant the army he was in.
And knowing all this, reading all this, Catch-22 came out.
I was a great fan of Kandy.
And when I saw Catch-22, what he did, the heller did, he showed that there's something so awful that you have to laugh at them to understand them.
If you do a military novel, you say, blood, blood, death, and testines from the trees.
By the 20th time you hang the testines from the trees, you're tired of looking at them.
It looks like spaghetti after a while.
Repetition of horror doesn't make horror.
And that's all you can do. The army is utterly horrible, boring and wasteful.
The military life is boring and wasteful.
And in there, I parodied a few other novels just for fun of it.
But the thing that goes right through it is understanding the military.
Usually I discovered that I had a Korean war veteran come up to me and come at my reunion and wouldn't have his face all shut away.
And he said, you wrote Bill a Glatine Hero?
I said, yes, looking for a chair to hide behind.
He said, I've got a copy of every edition of that book. I carry it through to combat, you know?
And that tells a story.
Another guy with the same thing, John Paul.
He's a real Green Beret, a kind of hitter, bangler.
He worked with the Montagniers, not like John Wayne with the fake one.
You know, he was up there and he killed him.
He was a great killer.
And Napoleon's troops carried a marshals back on their pack.
He carried a copy of Bill a Glatine Hero, all through the Korean war up there.
He was killing gooks and everything.
And he said, his rookie's in.
He reads him a chapter every night whether they liked it or not.
He'd break him in half, you know?
So I really feel that it's humor and parody and a lot of fun.
But it tells you something about the military condition that is absolutely dead true.
In fact, Harrison believes his version of war, as depicted in Bill the Galactic Hero,
comes closer to reality than do the more serious novels of others.
The pro-military novel is like Starship Trooper, you know, where everyone's being kind to each other.
I mean, in fact, I saw Norman Spindrad put it in the article the other week.
As Harry Harrison said, Bill Glatine, it's always Bob your buddy week.
And this was, we said in the army, in a novel whose name I shall not mention,
the guy in the heavy space armor is going down.
All friends come to rescue him, you know?
And in Bill, the guy goes in a swamp and the soldier in the marching by says,
help me, help me.
And they walk on by, says, Bob your buddy week.
And they say it's always Bob your buddy week.
And that's just, we should say in the army, you know?
I mean, it always is.
It's every man for himself.
Normally, normally.
You expect to get it put in broken off, and usually does.
We'll have more with Harry Harrison on our next show.
Well, this has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Harry Harrison is noted for his humorous science fiction works,
as well as his venture science fiction.
Right, but Harrison wrote the very serious novel Make Room, Make Room,
which portrays a grim near future earth plagued with overpopulation.
Some may be more familiar with the movie loosely based on this novel, Soylent Green.
Harrison's concern for overpopulation inspired his writing Make Room, Make Room.
His primary concern while writing was to void both lecturing and preaching.
And I felt very serious about population.
At that time, I wrote the book.
There were no fictional works on population.
There were no, at least, popular nonfiction books hadn't come out.
The world was completely unaware where we were going.
And I could see it.
I lived in Mexico and watched what was happening.
You read the Learned Journalist. He told you about it.
So I wanted to do a propaganda work that was disguised as not being propaganda.
And so I said it in the year 1999 in New York.
I made some millennial novel, bring a lot of overtones, you know, the millennium,
coming of Christ and the sort of thing.
And I didn't want to lecture.
So I very simply started the book, put the characters in the world,
went along for almost a fifth of the book,
and got everyone involved before someone turned to one character, the older character.
How did the world get this way?
At this point, I felt the reader was trapped enough to take one page of the lecture.
And I sent the book in my room and said,
Harry, they're trapped up to take four pages of the lecture.
So I just put in four pages, a copy of about a thousand words, two pages in the book,
telling you how it worked out that way.
And I said, my one little lecture right there, having done that little lecture,
it was, in a sense, a work of propaganda and art.
If you have better the art, you have better the propaganda.
1984 is propaganda.
On the beach is propaganda.
Both art, you get the message.
And that was it.
And after that, I worked around the point.
And if you were alive and warm, you understood it.
And the readers did.
Harrison worked hard to involve the reader by painting a picture of the future using indirect descriptions,
rather than simply telling the reader the situation directly.
I think having worked as an artist for a number of years,
I see in my mind, and I'm writing, I have a stage of people walking around,
and I see what's in the background, the foreground,
I hear the waves splashing and see them splashing.
And as always in writing, you should never tell you should show.
And Good Rang is hard work.
It should be transparent.
The reader should not see how you got the effect.
And one of the best ways, of course, it's hard to do,
is never say the world is full of a lot of people,
never say you're short of water, show them,
unaligned to get water out of a standpipe.
And then you know you're short of water and dramatize their need for the water.
And this is where your art comes in, which far too often,
if the writer cannot do that, then he does not succeed on that level.
People read his book for fun, you know.
But if you can get the reader emotionally involved,
get him trapped into the book,
and he comes out of the end, maybe not agreeing with you,
but at least he knows what you're said, he'll be thinking about it.
And I had one girl read that book out in New York.
She said, if I thought the world would be like that, I commit suicide.
I said, don't, don't.
The actor thinking that means you're going to vote right
and work for this world will not appeal.
That's a science fiction admonishing finger again,
saying shape up or ship out.
If you don't do this, you'll get that.
Make Room, Make Room is also a mystery novel.
Harrison shows this vehicle because it allowed him to show society from bottom to top.
All of science fiction, for the most part, is based on detective plot.
The mystery, will it be solved?
Even if they're not called like Hell, Clemens, Needle, not officially a mystery,
you want to find out how you got that way?
Will they solve the problem? Will they all live? Will they get all this world?
Will they do it?
That was the deliberate bit of my plot, a plot device of mine
that I wanted to show society from the lowest level to the high.
I wanted to show how everybody lived in that world.
So I used a very simple device of having a detective as a protagonist.
A very simple story.
And we all know from the beginning who did the murder.
We knew what was going to happen.
And it was not important, but it was a device to move the story along.
And like most crimes in New York, 9% aren't solved.
Just by chance that they are.
This is a way of getting you into the various levels of the strategy of society.
On our next show, we'll talk about Soilent Green.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Make Room, Make Room.
Harry Harrison's grim novel of an overpopulated near future New York
was the basis for the movie Soilent Green.
This movie made its appearance in the early 1970s,
and it starred Charlton Heston and Edward G. Robinson.
One of the movie's claims to fame is that it was the last motion picture Edward G. Robinson played in.
We spoke with Harrison about the transformation of the novel to the movie,
and we were particularly interested how the movie came to be plotted around cannibalism,
whereas this was never mentioned in the novel.
Harrison told us an interesting story which vividly shows how things apparently work in Hollywood.
The first time I heard about the fact that they wanted to make a film out of this book
was when I approached for a contract and I signed it,
and then it turned out the firm that bought it was a front for MGM,
and they sold MGM for one dollar.
They hate to pay the writer a decent fee,
but for some reason they pay everyone else.
They don't like to pay writers in Hollywood.
And it turned out that the producer Walter Zeltzer and lead actor Chuck Heston
have been trying to sell MGM for five years,
and they couldn't sell MGM for that overpopulation wasn't important enough to a film on.
So they then got a moronic screenwriter who put in cannibalism.
He thought they'd eat that up in MGM, and they did.
They thought it'd be a great idea for a film.
It was bought as a cannibalism film.
And I saw the screenplay and it was pretty atrocious,
and I could not do anything.
By contract I couldn't change one word.
So what I did do, I kept saying on memos what was wrong physically,
how it could not work, and they made a lot of changes.
I went down the set and pointed out things that hadn't been done,
and I gave copies of the book to all the actors and all the technical people,
and they got very interested.
And I talked to Eddie Robinson.
I remember he talked to Dick Fleischer.
I heard him say, I don't understand who I'm supposed to be, what is this role?
And there's no way of talking that rotten screenplay what it was.
So I asked if I could talk to him.
I introduced myself, and we had lunch.
I said, I wrote the book.
Oh, that's very interesting.
The Literate Man, the art collector, you know?
I explained that in the book in the year 2000, that is me, my army record, my age.
The hero there, not here, the old man is the only person who knew the good world as it was playing.
He said, the only person who lived when the world was green.
He said, that's a good idea.
It's not bad.
Having got that much, he went away and acted.
A lot of that was created on camera,
the interface between the director and the actors.
And I like to think myself, that was there all the time.
And I like to feel, A, it was my book,
and B, if there was some worth in the film, I helped to add to it.
One of the lead characters, the old man Saul, played by Robinson, is actually Harrison in 1999, as he mentioned.
Here he explains.
To keep him in the three-dimensional character, I guess, I use myself when I'll be of that age.
I don't want to live in that world.
That's why I wrote the book.
I do not want to be that person at that time.
Although the plot of make room, make room was significantly altered in Soylent Green,
Harrison told us that on the whole, he is pleased with the movie.
The technical people were so tremendous, and the acting was so good.
And it does what science fiction does so well, background as foreground.
You go to see it, it's a stupid little detective plot, and you know it's going to be Bonnie's maid in Soylent Green.
And then about a week later, you start thinking about that horrible world, that green world you're living in.
My God!
And it succeeds in that play.
It was sort of a shocker, an emotional shocker.
It works.
I think it works pretty well as a film.
There have been no complaints.
It's the only film MGM made money on that year.
That was the year the Great Walls bombed, it cost $14 million, and grossed $500,000.
So MGM should be happy, and Reston should be happy.
I can't complain.
Be sure to catch Soylent Green next time it plays on late night television.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.